JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is on assignment.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: the
tightening
presidential race.
We break down the latest poll
numbers and
delve into where the candidates
stand on the
issue of climate change.
Then: As Chicago mourns its
500th homicide
in this year alone, residents
desperately
search for solutions to the rise
in gun violence.
TAMAR MANASSEH, Mothers Against
Senseless
Killings: It's going to take a
lot of people
all doing something, not saying
something,
but doing something to fix that
problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And 15 years
after 9/11, a
new battlefront for fighting
terrorism.
How much responsibility do
social media networks
have to stop the spread of
extremism online?
EMMA LLANSO, Free Expression
Project: It seems
appealing to say, oh, just have
the major
social media companies take a
hard-line approach
to anything having to do with
ISIS.
But the fact is, that will end
up blocking
a lot of speech.
That will end up deactivating
the accounts
of many users.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's an emerging
question in
the presidential campaign: Who
would be the
better commander in chief?
Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton
will both
make their cases tonight on a
television special.
Trump was out this morning with
an early peek
at his argument.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Three crucial words that should
be at center,
always, of our foreign policy,
peace through
strength.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump's
visit to Philadelphia
today was all about military
policy.
He called for big increases in
defense spending
to beef up the Army, Navy and
Air Force after
years of congressionally
mandated spending
limits.
DONALD TRUMP: As soon as I take
office, I
will ask Congress to fully
eliminate the defense
sequester and will submit a new
budget to
rebuild our military.
It is so depleted.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, Trump
and Hillary
Clinton appear separately in a
televised forum
on national security.
Meanwhile, Clinton's campaign
unveiled a list
of 95 retired generals and
admirals backing
her.
That a came a day after Trump's
team touted
a list of 88 endorsing him.
Meanwhile, former President
Clinton stumped
in Orlando, Florida, and called
out Trump's
attacks on his wife and on the
family foundation.
BILL CLINTON, Former President
of the United
States: I mean, I saw where her
opponent attacked
my foundation.
I think that is because he knew
they were
about to report that he used his
foundation
to give money to your attorney
general, but
-- which is not legal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump has denied
that his donation
of $25,000 to support Florida's
Republican
Attorney General Pam Bondi in
2013 was meant
to influence her office's
possible review
of Trump University.
Meanwhile, there is fallout from
Trump's meeting
in Mexico last week with
President Pena Nieto.
It has drawn wide criticism in
Mexico, and,
today, the treasury minister
resigned, amid
reports he arranged the Trump
visit.
We will turn to the changing
shape of the
presidential race as reflected
in the polls
after the news summary.
In the day's other news:
President Obama urged
Americans to learn more about
the world and
to reject isolationism.
He was in Laos, where he toured
a centuries-old
Buddhist temple, and then held a
town hall
with youth leaders from across
Southeast Asia.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I believe that the United States
is and can
be a great force for good in the
world.
But if you're in the United
States, sometimes,
you can feel lazy, and think,
we're so big,
we don't have to really know
anything about
other people.
And that's part of what I'm
trying to change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later, at a
regional summit,
the president met informally
with Philippines
leader Rodrigo Duterte.
The White House called off a
formal meeting
when Duterte referred to Mr.
Obama using foul
language.
The Philippines also used the
summit to highlight
China's expansionism in the
South China Sea.
Filipino officials released
images said to
show an increased number of
Chinese ships
near a contested island.
The summit issued a vaguely
worded statement,
but didn't mention China by
name.
The United Nations reports
intense new fighting
in Western Syria has put at
least 100,000
people to flight.
They're fleeing homes in Hama
province, where
Islamist rebels launched an
offensive last
week, triggering government
airstrikes.
An estimated 11 million Syrians
have fled
since the war began in 2011.
Many of those migrants have gone
to Europe,
and Germany alone took in one
million people
last year.
That has caused a political
backlash, but
today German Chancellor Angela
Merkel went
before Parliament and insisted
the country
can handle the influx.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): The situation today
is many times
better than a year ago for
everyone, but there
remains a lot to do.
Change is not a bad thing.
And we especially -- and I can
speak for myself
-- who experienced German
unification have
seen how change can be a very
positive thing.
That will not change.
Germany will remain Germany,
with everything
that we love and treasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today,
Britain said it
is building a wall at the French
seaport of
Calais to stop illegal arrivals
of migrants
through the English Channel
Tunnel.
Back in this country, the
president has nominated
a man who could become the first
Muslim American
federal judge.
Abid Riaz Qureshi is a
Washington, D.C., lawyer.
He would need Senate
confirmation, and it
is not clear if he can get it
before Congress
goes home next month.
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones
industrial average
lost nearly 12 points to close
at 18526.
The Nasdaq rose eight points,
and the S&P
500 slipped a fraction.
And a woman who flew non-combat
missions in
World War II, and died just last
year, was
finally laid to rest today in
Arlington National
Cemetery.
Elaine Harmon served with the
WASPs, Women
Air Force Service Pilots.
But last year, the secretary of
the Army ruled
them ineligible for Arlington,
citing limited
space.
It took an act of Congress to
revoke that
ruling.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the newest
polls showing Donald Trump and
Hillary Clinton
in a dead heat; the two
candidates' views
on climate change; Chicago's
struggle to stem
its growing gun violence; and
much more.
Now we return to politics and a
tightening
race for president, both across
the nation
and in key battleground states.
New polls indicate Hillary
Clinton has a small
advantage, but Donald Trump is
closing the
gap in a few places.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: There's a theme
in a this
week's political headlines,
different polls
with one conclusion: Nationally,
the race
between Donald Trump and Hillary
Clinton is
getting closer.
The big picture?
Clinton leads by three points,
according to
the RealClearPolitics polling
average.
That is half of her lead a month
ago.
In other words, her convention
bounce is almost
gone.
She still has some key
advantages, leading
in states with a bonanza of
electoral votes,
like California and New York.
Clinton also has narrow leads in
pivotal battleground
states like Colorado and
Virginia.
Also in Clinton's favor, some
demographics.
She is now far in front with a
much-watched
group, white college-educated
women, that
according to The Washington
Post.
That's a reverse from 2012, when
Republican
Mitt Romney won with that group.
But Trump, he has got strengths,
too.
He is leading in the Midwest
overall, and
he is in striking distance in
Michigan and
Wisconsin, which typically vote
Democratic
at the presidential level.
Trump has also widened his lead
among older
white voters, and among those
without college
degrees, he now leads Clinton in
at least
43 states.
What might be most important
here is the timing.
These dynamics are in play 60
days out from
the election.
In the past four elections, this
is exactly
when breakaway shifts began in
the polls.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what do all
these polls
tell us about what's driving
voters?
And nine weeks out from Election
Day, what
do the candidates need to do to
drive their
message home?
We take a deeper look with Dan
Balz, chief
correspondent for The Washington
Post, and
Carroll Doherty.
He's the director for political
research for
the Pew Research Center.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Dan, I'm going to start with you
and your
newspaper's 50-state poll out
today.
What do these numbers tell you
about where
the race stands today?
DAN BALZ, Chief Political
Reporter, The Washington
Post: Judy, it tells us several
important
things, first, that the race has
tightened
from where it was after the
conventions.
Hillary Clinton got a bigger
bounce out of
the Democratic Convention than
Donald Trump
got from the Republican
Convention, and that
moved the polls in early and
mid-August.
But what we have seen since then
is a tightening.
We have seen a different Donald
Trump on the
campaign trail.
I can't say what reason it is
that it's tightened,
but it has tightened.
So that's the first point.
The second point is that our
50-state poll
underscores the degree to which
Hillary Clinton
still has an easier path to 270
electoral
votes than Donald Trump does.
Our numbers show that all she
would need to
do at this point is add Florida,
and she would
have 270 or more electoral
votes.
Donald Trump has a long, long
way to go to
get there.
He has very few options.
He has to thread the needle, and
she has many
choices and many options, both
in an effort
to block him in the states he
has to win,
but also to open up the map in
some areas
where she's might be able to
expand.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Carroll
Doherty, looking
at the polls you look at, which
are a lot
of them, including your own Pew
poll, what
do you see there in terms of
Hillary Clinton's
path?
CARROLL DOHERTY, Director of
Political Research,
Pew Research Center: Well, I
mean, we look
at the national picture, and
what you see
is two candidates who just are
viewed in extraordinarily
negative ways, in different
ways, but in negative
ways.
In our poll in August, only
about three in
10 voters said that Hillary
Clinton would
make a good or great president,
and 27 percent
said Donald Trump would make a
good or great
president.
There are more people voting
against than
for these candidates in some
ways.
And so negativity is really
driving a motivating
factor in this election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Dan, given
that -- and
we have been hearing about this
negativity
for some time -- given that, how
do you explain
Hillary Clinton's advantage?
DAN BALZ: Well, I think that, at
this point,
she has become less unacceptable
than Donald
Trump is.
You know, we have -- as Carroll
said, we have
to keep this in negative terms.
I mean, one of the things we
looked at , we
asked a question of, do you
think Donald Trump
or Hillary Clinton would -- if
they became
president, would threaten the
well-being of
the United States?
Ninety-five percent of the
people across the
country, when you aggregate it
up, believe
that one or both would be a
threat to the
well-being.
So there is great concern about
these two
candidates.
But because of many of the
things that Donald
Trump has said up to now, the
record he has
established as a candidate has
raised more
questions about him than Hillary
Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Carroll
Doherty, it is
the case that questions are out
there about
Donald Trump, but there are also
some opportunities
for him which show up in the
polls.
CARROLL DOHERTY: Absolutely.
I mean, you know, 43 percent say
he would
make not just a bad, but a
terrible president.
There's probably an opportunity
to move some
of these numbers a little more
in his direction.
And some of these key groups,
such as whites,
whites with college degrees,
importantly,
who have been trending
Republican in recent
years, I think there is an
opportunity for
him there possibly to bring some
of those
voters back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we have
already -- Dan,
we have already seen some
movement on his
part, as you mentioned, just
since the conventions.
DAN BALZ: Well, we have.
And in the polling that we did,
which we did,
the online polling with the firm
SurveyMonkey,
one of the things we noticed is
that he does
have strength in the Midwest.
There are a number of Midwestern
states, some
of which have gone Democratic
for five or
six elections in a row, where
he's doing reasonably
well and is within striking
distance.
So there's opportunity in those
areas where
the electorate is older and
whiter.
And, as Carroll said, one of the
problems
he has at this point, not
certainly it will
be the case on Election Day, but
right now,
is with white college-educated
voters and
particularly white women who
have college
degrees.
Mitt Romney won whites with
college educations
with 56 percent of the vote, and
Hillary Clinton
is winning that group at this
point.
So Donald Trump needs to do
that.
And the other thing he needs to
do, which
you would expect over time he
will have some
success on, and that is
consolidating the
Republican vote in the way that
Hillary Clinton
has already consolidated the
Democratic vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why has he had a
hard time
with the white, more educated
voter and Republicans?
CARROLL DOHERTY: Well, and
Republicans, a
bitter primary -- people forget
that he won
a very divided -- over a divided
field, and
didn't win a majority of all
Republican votes
in the primary.
So some of this is normal
consolidation, and
then some of it is
self-inflicted in terms
of some of the things he has
said and done
since then.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly,
Carroll Doherty,
how undecided are -- how many
voters out there
are undecided?
How malleable is voters'
thinking at this
point?
CARROLL DOHERTY: The broadest
range we have
been able to estimate, maybe one
in five.
It's probably down from where
it's been.
You have to factor in the third-
and fourth-party
factor this time and where they
might go as
well with Gary Johnson and Jill
Stein, but
about one in five or so.
And that's less than in prior
elections at
this stage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dan, how do you
see this question
of how malleable, how -- how
many voters are
there out there who still might
make up their
minds, might change their minds,
go in another
direction?
DAN BALZ: It's very hard to
estimate.
And I think polling doesn't help
us a lot
on this.
I mean, as Carroll said, there's
a sizable
number who say they haven't
quite made up
their mind or might change their
mind.
But, as we have said, this is
such an unhappy
electorate.
You have to think that most
people kind of
know where they're going to end
up, but they're
not -- they're just so
conflicted about the
choice, that they're not really
ready to say
with any certainty that they
will definitely
do that.
And so I think it leaves some
uncertainty
out there in where these polls
might move
over the next 60 days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And quick final
question to
Carroll Doherty about these
third-party candidates,
Gary Johnson and Jill Stein.
Can you say at this point how
much of a factor
they can make?
CARROLL DOHERTY: History
suggests that August
measures of third-party support,
that would
decline over time, perhaps, but
this is a
very unusual election.
We had Gary Johnson at 10
percent in our most
recent national poll.
His profile voter, very young,
very young
profile voters for Gary Johnson
at this point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, as you say,
typically
-- and, Dan, I will come back to
you very
quickly on this.
Typically, the third-party
candidates lose
ground in the final weeks of an
election?
DAN BALZ: That's usually true,
but I think
that the issue is if Gary
Johnson were able
to qualify and hit that 15
percent threshold
to get into the presidential
debates, that
would change that, because he
would then have
national visibility that he
doesn't have at
this point.
But, so far, he is not quite at
that level.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's an
election like
we have never seen in so many
ways.
Thank you, both, Dan Balz,
Carroll Doherty.
CARROLL DOHERTY: Thank you.
DAN BALZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And next, we turn
now to our
periodic look at the major
issues facing the
country, and where the
presidential candidates
stand on them.
Tonight, the focus is climate
change.
It is a subject that has gotten
very little
attention so far during the
campaign, even
as it highlights one of the
starkest differences
between the candidates.
William Brangham has our report.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This past
weekend, the U.S.
and China officially ratified
the so-called
Paris climate accords.
They are the most substantial
move by the
world's nations to put some
limits on the
greenhouse gas emissions that
are driving
global temperatures upwards.
And upwards, they keep going.
2016 is on pace to be the
hottest year in
recorded history, breaking the
record set
by 2015, and 2014 before that.
As many climate models
predicted, a warming
planet has coincided with
increased heat waves
and droughts, as well as more
intense storms.
Glaciers and ice sheets continue
to shrink,
sending sea levels upwards and
threatening
coastal communities all over the
world with
potentially catastrophic, costly
flooding.
Michael Oppenheimer is a climate
scientist
at Princeton University.
MICHAEL OPPENHEIMER, Princeton
University:
If we don't start with rapid
emissions reductions
and substantial emissions
reductions, that
we will pass a danger point,
beyond which
the consequences for many people
and countries
on Earth will simply become
unacceptable and
eventually disastrous.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But the Paris
accords only
set voluntary caps on carbon
emissions.
So how seriously the United
States follows
through on these commitments, as
well as its
other efforts to curtail carbon,
will fall
largely on the next president.
And while there are plenty of
policies where
Clinton and Trump have different
views, there's
probably no greater divergence
between them
than on the issue of climate
change.
One thinks it is real and poses
a grave threat;
the other thinks it's a fantasy.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I think it's a big scam for a
lot of people
to make a lot of money.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Donald Trump
has repeatedly
called climate change a hoax.
He claims the planet is
freezing, and that
scientists are -- quote --
"stuck in ice."
Trump argues that environmental
regulation
is an enormous anti-competitive
tax on U.S.
industry which also threatens
American jobs,
especially in the coal industry.
DONALD TRUMP: The federal
government, the
regulations that they have, they
put the coal
miners out of business.
The coal mines are shut.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He says a
Trump administration
will undo as many regulations as
possible,
starting with President Obama's
Clean Power
Plan, which has put limits on
coal emissions.
Trump has also promised to rip
up or cancel
the Paris accords, and block any
funding for
international climate change
efforts.
He supports the expansion of
coal and oil
and natural gas as main energy
sources for
the United States.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Climate change is such a
consequential crisis
to everybody in the world.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hillary
Clinton, on the
other hand, has repeatedly
called climate
change an urgent threat, and one
that is driven
in large part by human activity,
namely the
burning of fossil fuels.
Clinton supports cutting carbon
emissions,
supports the goals of the Paris
accords, as
well as President Obama's clean
energy plan.
Clinton acknowledges these plans
will cost
coal industry jobs, and she has
proposed a
multibillion-dollar renewable
energy plan
that she says will attempt to
replace some
of those lost jobs.
To help understand what a
Clinton or Trump
administration might mean with
regards to
climate change, I'm joined now
by Coral Davenport,
who is an environmental reporter
for The New
York Times, and Chris Mooney,
who covers science
and the environment for The
Washington Post.
Thank you both very much for
being here.
Chris, I would like to start
with you.
Before we get to the candidates,
let's talk
for a moment about, what does
the current
science tell us about the
current impacts
of climate change?
CHRIS MOONEY, The Washington
Post: Well, 2016
is a very, very hot year.
We're probably going to have
three hottest
year records in a row, 2014,
2015, 2016 topping
them all.
And we have seen some really
striking climate-related
effects on the world, most
starkly this year,
I think, the bleaching of coral
reefs, big
disaster at the Great Barrier
Reef.
This is something that climate
scientists
have been predicting for a long
time, and
now it's happening.
But there's all kinds of impacts
all around
the world.
We are losing more and more ice
from the polar
regions.
Seas are rising.
Of course, temperature records
are being broken.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Anything you
would add to
that, Coral?
CORAL DAVENPORT, The New York
Times: I would
just say, the specific sort of
marker that
a lot of scientists and
scientific institutions
have put forth is the warming of
the atmosphere
beyond 3.7 degrees Fahrenheit,
on average.
That's kind of the point at
which a lot of
scientists say we will be
irrevocably locked
into a future of these climate
impacts, and
we're at the point right now
where scientists
say a lot of that is already
baked in.
There was a point...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There's no way
we're going
to stop hitting that mark.
CORAL DAVENPORT: Right.
There was a point in the climate
debate where
it was about, how do we keep
from getting
there?
At this point, in terms of the
emissions that
are already in the atmosphere
and the rate
of emissions now being produced
today, scientists
are saying, we're probably set
to go past
that tipping point.
And the debate is really about,
how do you
keep it from getting far, far
worse?
How do you keep the planet
inhabitable by
humans?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: OK, staying
with you, I'm
going to put the crystal ball in
your hands
now.
It's January 2017.
Donald Trump is inaugurated
president.
What does U.S. energy policy and
climate change
policy look like?
CORAL DAVENPORT: Oh, well, the
most significant
climate policy that Donald Trump
has talked
about is, he calls it canceling
the Paris
agreement.
The Paris agreement was a
landmark accord
reached last year in Paris which
for the first
time joined almost every country
on Earth,
over 195 countries, into
committing to taking
actions to reducing their carbon
emissions.
It was key for the U.S. to be a
centerpiece
of that.
The U.S. and China are the
world's two largest
emitters of carbon emissions,
the U.S. historically
the largest.
If the U.S. actually were to
pull out of the
Paris agreement, the deal could
potentially
unravel.
And so the question now is, what
would happen
in a Trump administration?
And the rest of the world, led
by U.N. Secretary-General
Ban Ki-Moon, is trying to kind
of figure out,
well, how do we keep the Paris
accord intact
if there were to be a President
Trump?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, Chris,
take on that
question.
Does a president have the
ability, do they
have the levers to rip up the
Paris accords?
CHRIS MOONEY: It depends what
happens during
this administration before the
next president
comes in.
There is a sort of rapid push
right now by
the Obama administration and
many nations
of the world to bring it into
force.
And once it actually enters into
force, then
-- you have to have 55 countries
representing
55 percent of the global
emissions in order
to achieve that.
Once that happens, there is
language in the
agreement saying you need three
years before
you can withdraw again.
And then there's a year waiting
period.
So it sounds like, from that
language, the
hands of the next president
could be tied
if this thing enters into force.
And we're going to have to see.
Right now, only about 40 percent
of global
emissions, 39 percent have
signed on, and
that's because U.S. and China
just did.
So, you need India, you need
Canada, you need
Great Britain.
You can do the math, right, but
you have to
get to 55, and you have to do it
this year.
Then it would be more difficult
to withdraw.
But a President Trump, if he
didn't want to
comply, but couldn't make it go
away, could
just not cooperate.
And it's not clear what would
happen then.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
crystal ball
is in your hands now.
January 2017, Hillary Clinton is
inaugurated.
What does energy policy look
like?
CHRIS MOONEY: I think it looks
like a pretty
strong continuation of Obama
climate policy.
I think absolutely you would be
fulfilling
the Paris climate agreement and
trying to
reduce U.S. emissions.
And the goal is to get them 26
to 28 percent
below 2005 levels by 2025.
And then there's going to be a
process where
we ratchet up and try to make it
even more
ambitious.
I'm sure President Clinton would
be very much
on board with that.
I think, domestically, one of
the most interesting
things that you would see under
President
Clinton is going to be the big
energy infrastructure
transition.
How much solar can we install?
How do we integrate it onto the
grid?
How much of a role is natural
gas still playing
as coal dwindles?
Those are going to be the kind
of real issues
during the Clinton years that
are going to
determine how much the United
States puts
into the atmosphere.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Coral, I know
you have been
following this somewhat.
Hillary Clinton got into some
trouble when
he said, as we make this push to
renewables,
coal jobs are going to be lost.
Now, she has put out a big
proposal to say,
I'm going to beef up renewables,
we're going
to try to save some of those
jobs.
How realistic is that?
CORAL DAVENPORT: It's
interesting to see Hillary
Clinton, even if it didn't come
out quite
the way she meant it to, openly
acknowledge
that climate policy really does
direct take
aim at coal.
Burning coal for electricity is
the largest
source of planet-warming
emissions in the
U.S.
So if you're trying on stop
global warming,
you're going to take aim at
coal.
That means eventually the coal
community,
coal miners, the coal-fired
power plants,
are going to get hurt.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Chris, last
question to
you.
The ability of a president to
really make
meaningful contributions to this
debate, if
you were to go forward 50, 100,
150 years,
would we be able to tell the
difference between
a Clinton administration and a
Trump administration,
meaning, how much influence do
presidents
really have on this policy when
we're talking
about a global problem?
CHRIS MOONEY: Some significant
influence,
but I agree with you that there
are so many
other things going on.
For instance, one of the reasons
the United
States has actually been
reducing its emissions
in recent years is actually that
there's been
a boom in natural gas.
It's displacing coal.
It emits less carbon dioxide
when you burn
it.
This is not really an Obama
policy.
It's just something that
happened because
of technology and the free
market.
And, globally, you're seeing a
big, big trend
towards large installations of
renewable energies
across the world.
You are going to see huge
installations of
wind and solar in places like
Africa.
These things are going to happen
no matter
what.
They're going to happen for
largely non-policy
free market reasons even in the
United States.
So, I think that there are
forces moving that
are not really at the
presidential level.
But, at the same time, the Obama
administration
kind of shows how you can use
diplomacy to
bring the most important
countries together
and get the whole world on
board.
So I wouldn't discount that
either.
So I think that the world will
continue trying
to grapple with the climate
problem, no matter
who is U.S. president.
But I think that, depending on
who that president
is, it can have a significant
influence on
the trajectory.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Chris Mooney,
Coral Davenport, thank you both
very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
woman who
revitalized the traditional
textile industry
in Laos; and what social media
networks should
do to combat terrorism online.
But, first: a bloody year in
Chicago.
And residents, police and
community leaders
are asking why the violence is
getting worse,
instead of better?
It is already the deadliest year
in more than
two decades, 500 homicides so
far, 90 in August
alone.
The killings were mostly
clustered on the
city's South and West Sides.
John Yang went to Chicago to try
to find out
why, despite calls for new
action, the violence
there is so hard to rein in.
JOHN YANG: On this busy street
corner in Englewood,
one of the hardest-hit
neighborhoods on the
city's troubled South Side, it
looks like
a party.
Kids are playing.
The grill is fired up.
In the past, though, 75th and
Stewart felt
like a war zone.
TAMAR MANASSEH, Mothers Against
Senseless
Killings: This corner is a
corner where a
man was killed -- well, several
men, a woman
was killed, and a child was
killed.
A 9-year-old girl was killed
right across
the street over there washing
her dog in broad
daylight.
JOHN YANG: But for two summers,
a group called
Mothers Against Senseless
Killings, or MASK,
led by Tamar Manasseh, has been
out on this
corner, and there hasn't been a
single shooting.
Volunteer Laura Lambert (ph)
comes from nearby
Hyde Park.
And 91-year-old Edwina Knight
(ph) crosses
the street every day from the
house she's
lived in for 57 years.
TAMAR MANASSEH: Just show up.
That's all you have to do.
Show up, grab a lawn chair and a
pair of sunglasses,
and you can do this.
You can change the world with
that.
JOHN YANG: But the moms of MASK
are only on
one corner in a city of 2.7
million people.
Killings have spiked this
summer.
Chicago has already recorded
more homicides
this year than it did in all of
last year.
DR.
GARY SLUTKIN, University of
Illinois at Chicago:
This is also very typical of all
epidemics.
You can see the high density of
shootings.
JOHN YANG: University of
Illinois at Chicago
physician Gary Slutkin says
epidemic is exactly
the right word.
He argues that violence is a
contagious disease.
DR.
GARY SLUTKIN: For example,
you're exposed
to flu, you're more likely to
get flu.
You don't actually get flu
without being exposed.
Same thing for T.B., cholera and
violence.
I mean, why does someone who was
exposed to
child abuse, abuse their own
kids?
That would be the person who you
would think
would be least likely to do it,
because he
knows how bad it was.
But, in fact, he's picked up
this contagious
set of behaviors.
JOHN YANG: So Dr. Slutkin treats
gun violence
as a contagious disease.
He founded Cure Violence, now an
international
effort that trains former gang
members and
felons to stop violence in its
tracks, violence
interrupters.
DR.
GARY SLUTKIN: They are always in
the community,
aware of what's going on, and
asking families
and people, you know, who's
upset?
You know, who is -- somebody
slept with someone's
girlfriend, someone was
disrespected, someone
owes somebody money.
And we can reach those people
with these health
workers.
They may not look like health
workers to everybody.
They know how to cool people
down, know how
to buy time,
JOHN YANG: Chicago violence
interrupter Chico
Tillmon knows how to cool people
down.
He drove us around the South
Side last week,
where much of the violence
happens.
CHICO TILLMON, Violence
Interrupter: In early
January, two cliques were
arguing.
So one clique went into another
clique's neighborhood
and got on Facebook Live and was
like: F.
you all.
We're in your all neighbor.
We're in your all gas station.
Within 30 minutes, on that walk
from the gas
station back to the house, two
were dead,
one was wounded.
JOHN YANG: It's not like this is
a gang war
over turf.
This is just sort of...
CHICO TILLMON: Interpersonal.
I said something you didn't
agree with, you
responded negatively, it ended
up in gun violence.
JOHN YANG: Violence interrupter
Ulysses "U.S."
Floyd was a leader in one of
Chicago's most
notorious gangs, the Gangster
Disciples.
ULYSSES "U.S." FLOYD, Violence
Interrupter:
I know I helped start this mess,
so I wanted
to help clean it up.
JOHN YANG: He told us that gangs
are very
different now than they were in
his day.
ULYSSES "U.S." FLOYD: One or two
men control
everything.
Now you have got a lot of
different little
gangs split all over.
They are offsprings of the major
gangs, what
they call cliques.
And they just do what they want
to do.
Ain't nobody really in control,
no structure,
no rules.
JOHN YANG: The number of
neighborhoods where
Chicago's branch of Cure
Violence operates
varies based on funding.
But a Justice Department study
found that,
at one point, the group helped
reduce violence
by 40 percent to 70 percent in
some of the
areas where they were operating.
Today, they are in only five of
the city's
77 neighborhoods.
On our drive through the South
Side, we saw
children walking home from
school.
What do you think when you look
at kids that
age?
CHICO TILLMON: I'm praying that
they survive
through this -- through this
epidemic that's
going on in the city.
It's not a Woodlawn problem.
It's not a South Shore problem.
It's everybody's problem.
And we don't understand that
until the disease
hits home, until one of our
loved ones is
killed by gun violence.
Then we want to get involved.
JOHN YANG: Police have seized
6,000 illegal
guns this year.
That's one every hour, many from
nearby Indiana,
where laws aren't as tough.
Chicago cops are feeling the
heat, a federal
probe of the use of deadly force
and public
trust at a breaking point after
last year's
release of a dash-cam video
showing a white
officer fatally shooting a black
teenager
16 times.
After another deadly weekend,
Superintendent
Eddie Johnson virtually threw up
his hands.
EDDIE JOHNSON, Chicago Police
Superintendent:
It's not a police issue.
It's a society issue.
Impoverished neighborhoods,
people without
hope do these kinds of things.
You show me a man that doesn't
have hope,
I show you one that is willing
to pick up
a gun and do anything with it.
LANCE WILLIAMS, Northeastern
Illinois University:
I really see this problem as a
cultural problem.
JOHN YANG: Lance Williams is an
associate
professor of urban affairs at
Northeastern
Illinois University and an
inner-city youth
advocate.
LANCE WILLIAMS: This is not a
law enforcement
problem.
I mean, you can hire all of the
police that
you want.
You're not going to solve this
problem, because
these young men are acting in
alignment with
their cultural value system.
They need a cultural retooling
process.
JOHN YANG: Williams says it's a
culture that's
developed in the absence of
working institutions
and in the midst of crushing
poverty.
One big cause of much
frustration?
Nearly half of black men in
Chicago aged 20
to 24 are not in school and out
of work, far
higher than the national rate of
32 percent.
LANCE WILLIAMS: There's a lot of
rage.
There's a lot of anger.
They just see their lives, you
know, just
passing them by.
They don't -- they haven't been
to school.
They're not qualified for jobs.
There are no viable businesses
in their neighborhood,
so they're really depressed.
And then they're self-medicating
through drinking
and drugging.
And the only individuals around
them are other
young African-American males
like themselves
who have these -- these same
forms of depression.
JOHN YANG: Another structural
factor playing
into the violence, Chicago is
one of the nation's
most segregated cities.
LANCE WILLIAMS: All of the poor
blacks live
way, way, way, way away from
affluent people,
from the business district, from
the tourist
district.
You know, you have some kids in
these neighborhoods
far south that have never been
downtown.
Right?
And you have folks in the white
communities
who have never been to the South
Side.
So, what happens is, you have an
out-of-sight,
out-of-minute kind of deal.
CHICO TILLMON: I was 23 when I
went to prison.
JOHN YANG: For Chico Tillmon,
who spent 16
years and three months in
federal prison,
violence is never out of sight
or mind, turning
other people's lives around
after turning
his own around.
CHICO TILLMON: Being able to see
all the violence
and chaos in the community that
I once was
a part of, and that I once
helped produce,
pushed me or gave me an
obligation to make
a change.
JOHN YANG: Since you got out of
prison...
CHICO TILLMON: Yes.
JOHN YANG: ... you got your
bachelor's degree.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes, sir.
JOHN YANG: You got your master's
degree.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes, sir.
JOHN YANG: You're working on
your Ph.D.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes, sir.
JOHN YANG: How long, how many
years are we
talking about here?
CHICO TILLMON: Five years.
JOHN YANG: Pretty determined.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes.
JOHN YANG: Pretty motivated.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes, sir.
I got out with a purpose, and I
got out trying
to not only do something that
was beyond what
I believed I could do, but to
inspire hope
within all the people that I
left behind in
prison.
JOHN YANG: Back on the corner of
75th and
Stewart, Tamar Manasseh is also
determined
that change will happen.
TAMAR MANASSEH: It's going to
take a lot of
people all doing something, not
saying something,
but doing something to fix that
problem.
And the doing something is the
sitting here.
It's the sitting here, having a
conversation.
I live on this block with you.
I live in this city with you.
I live in this country with you.
And we're all affected by the
same things.
And, sometimes, when we don't
talk to each
other, when we don't interact,
we miss that.
JOHN YANG: On one corner, a
small effort in
response to a big problem.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang in Chicago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And online, you
can take a
closer look at Chicago's history
of violence.
We go back 50 years to count all
of the city's
homicide victims.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now: how the U.S. government is
trying to
stem the tide of terrorism
messages online,
and the role played by social
media.
The story is part of our
coverage of the 15th
anniversary of the 9/11 attacks.
It was produced in partnership
with tonight's
PBS "NOVA" special, "15 Years of
Terror,"
reported by Miles O'Brien, and
it's our weekly
segment about the Leading Edge
of technology.
MILES O'BRIEN: They called it
Think Again,
Turn Away.
The concept?
Use sarcasm as way to turn
Islamic State images
into an argument against their
grim techniques
of terror.
The creator and producer?
The U.S. State Department.
Today, everyone agrees the
message was worse
than ineffective.
It played right into the hands
of the terrorists.
RICHARD STENGEL, U.S.
Undersecretary of State:
You know, part if it is that I
don't think
the government should do snark
or sarcasm.
I don't think we're good at it.
MILES O'BRIEN: Richard Stengel
is the undersecretary
of state for public diplomacy
and public affairs.
He realized he was the one who
needed to think
again.
RICHARD STENGEL: So, one of the
things that
we realized is that we're not
the best messenger
for the message that we want to
get out there.
In fact, when we are a messenger
at all, they
use that against us.
MILES O'BRIEN: So they stopped
trying to do
it themselves, and hired some
marketing pros.
TONY SGRO, Advertising and
Marketing Veteran:
I think that they just -- it was
out of their
league.
MILES O'BRIEN: Tony Sgro is an
advertising
and marketing veteran who is
spearheading
a novel competition for college
students to
create a counter or alternative
narrative
to the Islamic State propaganda
campaign.
TONY SGRO: The government is not
the most
capable person to develop a
counternarrative
for a 21-year- old.
There's no credibility factor
there.
MILES O'BRIEN: The competition
is called Peer
to Peer.
Undergraduates at two dozen
schools all over
the world have participated.
In Afghanistan, they created a
campaign that
included a talk show that
focused on understanding
the real message of the Koran
against extremism.
They reached more than five
million people.
Lahore University produced a
plea from students
to students to turn apathy into
empathy.
The winner of the competition
was the Rochester
Institute of Technology.
Students there came up with this
multiplatform
campaign.
MAN: Join the campaign.
WOMAN: Because it's time.
WOMAN: To ex-app.
TONY SGRO: It's beyond bombs,
bullets, and
drones.
It really is.
I mean, we need that stuff.
But we really -- how are you
going to win
the hearts and minds?
That's communications.
It's a marketing communications
issue.
MILES O'BRIEN: Countering the
messages is
one thing.
Trying to stop them from
spreading in the
first place is another.
For years, the social networking
platforms
took a laissez-faire approach to
this problem.
And it only got worse.
But in 2013, things started to
change.
During a horrifying assault on a
shopping
mall in Nairobi, Kenya,
attackers with the
al-Qaida affiliate Al-Shabaab
live-tweeted
for hours as they shot more than
175 people,
killing 67.
JEFF WEYERS, Intelligence
Analyst: That was
the first time where Twitter was
actively
removing the content that they
were posting.
MILES O'BRIEN: Jeff Weyers is a
police officer
and terrorism analyst based in
Ontario, Canada.
JEFF WEYERS: They were actively
tweeting their
attack online, and it was the
first time we
really saw that.
ISIS completely blew that out of
the water.
Right?
They took that concept and
magnified it by
a million.
MILES O'BRIEN: Today, Twitter
claims it aggressively
goes after accounts linked to
terrorists.
The company says it closed
360,000 of them
in the past year.
JEFF WEYERS: They were very much
pushed into
it, as opposed to wanting to go
down that
road.
And now I have no doubt that
they're spending
millions of dollars just
countering that message.
MILES O'BRIEN: Facebook is the
largest social
networking platform on the
planet.
It says it has a zero tolerance
policy for
extremists, but it must contend
with a tsunami
of content.
Facebook has more than a billion
users actively
posting every day.
The company says about one-half
of 1 percent
of flagged items are linked to
terrorism.
But that is still a lot of
material.
Monika Bickert is Facebook's
head of global
policy management.
MONIKA BICKERT, Head of Global
Policy Management,
Facebook: We use photo-matching
technology
to identify when somebody is
trying to upload
to Facebook an image that we
have already
removed for violation our
policies.
Of course, the image may or may
not violate
our policies when it's uploaded
again, because
it could be somebody who is
sharing a terrorist
image the Times Square part of a
news story
or to condemn violence.
So we use automation to flag
content that
we will then have our teams
review.
MILES O'BRIEN: But are there
more advanced
ways to stop the extremist
messages from spreading?
Is there a better technological
solution?
HANY FARID, Dartmouth College:
We have the
technology to disrupt, not
eliminate, but
to disrupt the global
transmission of
extremism-related
content.
MILES O'BRIEN: Hany Farid is a
computer scientist
at Dartmouth College.
He has developed a technique to
permanently
attach unique digital signatures
to images,
making it possible for the
social networking
companies to identify and stop
the spread
of videos made by, of and for
terror.
HANY FARID: So, here is the
actual raw frame
that you're seeing processing
one frame at
a time.
And in the frame, we actually
analyze multiple
blocks within it.
The yellow crosshairs that
you're seeing are
enumerating the various blocks
of the video
that we're analyzing.
This yellow histogram is a
distribution of
the measurements that we're
making from each
individual block, and then that
gets translated
into an actual digital
signature, which I
visualize here with a stemplot.
MILES O'BRIEN: The sheer volume
of the problem
is daunting, billions of uploads
a day, each
of them with millions of pixels.
Can a computer possibly be
trained to sort
through it all and find the
images that inspire
new recruits, incite new
violence and terrify
us all?
Farid has already proven the
technology works.
He got the idea 10 years ago.
The Internet had become a
platform for child
pornographers.
Applying digital signatures to
those images
has greatly reduced child
pornography on the
big social networking sites.
HANY FARID: So, if there's just
one image
in an upload of yours that has
child pornography,
we -- the account can be frozen.
The contents of that account can
be assessed,
and new content can be
discovered.
MILES O'BRIEN: But extremist
content is much
harder to clearly define.
The director of the Free
Expression Project
at the Center for Democracy and
Technology
is Emma Llanso.
EMMA LLANSO, Free Expression
Project: The
challenge with having a
hard-and-fast rule
against any a kind of content is
that it really
does shut down the opportunity
for discussion
around that sort of material.
MILES O'BRIEN: In June 2016,
David Thomson,
a French journalist who reports
on Islamic
extremism, found his Facebook
page suspended
for three days.
The offense?
A photo he had posted in 2013 as
part of the
story he was doing included a
partial depiction
of the Islamic State flag, a
cautionary tale
of the unintended consequences
of targeting
terrorism online.
EMMA LLANSO: It seems appealing
to say, oh,
just have the major social media
companies
take a hard-line approach to
anything having
to do with ISIS.
But the fact is, that will end
up blocking
a lot of speech.
That will end up deactivating
the accounts
of many users.
I mean, some of the platforms
have had issues
with just deactivating the
accounts that women
whose first name is Isis.
This is a difficult kind of
censorship to
enact.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's no longer
just a war of
bullets, drones and bombs.
Technology has created a new
battlefield online,
and civil society is still
grasping for strategies
to engage in a virtual battle.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
Miles' full
report, "15 Years of Terror,"
tonight on "NOVA"
on most PBS stations.
Now we return to Laos, a country
of rich and
deep history scarred by American
bombing during
the Vietnam War.
Special correspondent Mike Cerre
reports now
from the capital, Vientiane, on
how one American
woman helped heal frayed ties
between the
U.S. and Laos by preserving
tradition there
one thread at a time.
MIKE CERRE: The first American
president to
address the Lao people, from a
podium decorated
with traditional Lao textiles
made by the
first American company allowed
to do business
here since the end of the war.
CAROL CASSIDY, Lao Textiles:
They actually
arrived in Laos, found us and
found something
that we had in the colors that
were appropriate,
red, white and blue.
MIKE CERRE: How this American
weaver from
Connecticut and her
Ethiopian-American husband
helped save an endangered
traditional craft,
in a country ravaged by a secret
war the U.S.
waged here during the Vietnam
War, is the
stuff of Southeast Asia lore.
Like Jim Thompson, the legendary
former CIA
agent who launched the Thai silk
industry
after World War II, before he
mysteriously
disappeared, Carol Cassidy
helped resurrect
the traditional Lao textile
trade after their
war.
CAROL CASSIDY: He had a great
idea, which
was to build a business based on
traditional
skills.
That's something that, here in
Laos, at Lao
Textiles, we have done as well.
One of the important
distinctions is, I am
a weaver.
I have devoted my entire life
since the age
of 17 to weaving one and
designing.
MIKE CERRE: When she and her
husband came
here nearly 30 years ago as U.N.
development
advisers, full diplomatic
relations between
the U.S. and Laos had yet to be
restored.
Americans were still viewed
somewhat suspiciously
by the communist Lao government,
the U.S.
having been on the losing side
of the Laos
civil war and communist
takeover.
CAROL CASSIDY: So it was really
this rebuilding
of Lao-American relations, that
we have felt
that.
And my husband and I, who we
built the business
together, he is much more
diplomatic than
I am.
And I think it's been very
helpful navigating
the complexities.
MIKE CERRE: They eventually set
up a textile
business of their own with a
core staff of
weavers from the north, many of
them the wives
and mothers of the Pathet Lao
communist forces
who had been living and working
out of caves
during the nearly 10 years of
U.S. bombing.
CAROL CASSIDY: So, our
technology is very
simple.
It's portable.
When they fled the bombing, they
were able
to take with them simple
technology and be
able to keep their family
traditions.
MIKE CERRE: The work is
incredibly painstaking,
from the hand-dyeing of the
silk, to spinning
the silk yarn, and reproducing
traditional
designs from memory, using
traditional Lao
looms many consider to be the
inspiration
for the first computers and
binary code.
CAROL CASSIDY: The important
part is this
vertical heddle, because that
the storage
system, and that is the floppy
drive.
This is the program, and the
strings below,
every string down there
represents one row
of program.
MIKE CERRE: Carol produces
world-renowned
textiles for top interior
designers and architects
around the globe.
CAROL CASSIDY: This is part of
the dying art,
which is the creation of complex
patterns.
And this is the skill Boua (ph)
and Chan (ph)
both learned from their
grandmother and their
mother.
MIKE CERRE: Her real passions
and commitment
has been using her weaving
expertise to help
empower local women, which she
first started
doing as a U.N. adviser in
Africa.
CAROL CASSIDY: Most of the
artisans are indigenous
people, rural people.
They are not the most visible
and they don't
have a voice, and that's really
what I have
been trying to do working with
these communities.
MIKE CERRE: Carol Cassidy may
have started
her career as a globe-trotting
weaver, but
over the years since she's been
here in Laos,
she has become more of a
cultural ambassador,
an evangelist for the role that
traditional
arts and crafts can play in the
economic development
of the country.
CAROL CASSIDY: I feel that an
important part
of who you are is through your
heritage, and
it's through your past.
In Laos and in Southeast Asia in
general,
textiles are among the most
important parts
of their past.
So, your uniqueness is expressed
what you
wear, how you wear it, what you
weave.
The director of the IMF,
Christine Lagarde,
was here earlier this year,
which was a very
important visit, because we had
the opportunity
to show her that stability,
ethnic identity,
employment, women empowerment,
culture is
all interwoven in what we're
doing here at
Lao Textiles.
MIKE CERRE: Carol lives and
works out of a
French colonial home in the
center of Vientiane,
where she also raised two
children.
Her husband and business
partner, Dawit Seyoum,
takes cares of the operational
side of the
business.
It's run more like an extended
family co-op,
with many of the original
weavers and their
children still working with
them.
CAROL CASSIDY: Because we have
been able to
retain our staff for more than
25 years, through
our pension plan, through our
health plan,
we have been able to then weave
these extraordinary
projects.
MIKE CERRE: She has experienced
firsthand
the many changes Laos has
undergone since
coming here in 1989, when the
only way to
cross the Mekong River into
Thailand was by
boat.
Vientiane, the capital, had no
traffic lights
or buildings taller than a palm
tree, and
everyone in her neighborhood
knew each other.
CAROL CASSIDY: And you go away
for a month,
and this was all old buildings
that came down,
and I guess it's going to be a
hotel.
MIKE CERRE: As successful as her
business
has become, both as an
enterprise and a model
for maintaining traditional
textiles, her
biggest concerns are with the
latest assaults
on traditional weaving from the
modern reality
of mass production of textiles
throughout
the region.
CAROL CASSIDY: Oh, no, this
wasn't made in
Laos.
We don't have the industrial
capacity.
The extraordinary part of Laos
is that we
still handcraft high-quality,
excellent textiles.
MIKE CERRE: Having embraced the
Lao culture
as completely as she has over
the years, she
has faith that traditional
weaving will somehow
withstand yet another challenge
to its legacy.
CAROL CASSIDY: Where your spirit
goes in life,
in marriage, and death are all
interwoven
into the story of the textiles.
MIKE CERRE: For the "PBS
NewsHour," Mike Cerre
in Vientiane, Laos.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
Tomorrow, our Making Sense
series catches
a wave and looks at how trade
with China affects
the economic and political
landscape here
at home.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.